## 10.3 Transferring save files

There is no way to transfer a save file (and thus a character) to/from single and multi player. To transfer files between computers (and even between a PC and a Mac), simply copy the save files over. Since the 1.08 patch, this is now possible without any problems for multi player files as well. For information on how to transfer a character from Diablo to Hellfire, see the *readme.txt* file in your Hellfire folder.

To transfer a multi player character from one computer to another in Hellfire (and in Diablo on the PC previous to the 1.08 patch) is a bit tricky. The reason for this is that the game has included the computer name into the save file (you can find the computer name under network in the control panel). Thus, for a save file to be playable on another machine, the computer name has to be the same as on the computer you take the character from. Otherwise, Hellfire will not recognize the save. If the computer name of the two computers is the same, one can simply copy the multi player save file from one of the computers to the other. Don’t forget to put it in the Windows folder of the new computer if it is a PC. Single player files seems to be transferable between computers, even between a PC and a Mac) without problems in any version.

If the number of the save file (the # in the name above) is already in use on the new computer it should be safe to change it to a non used number in the 0..9 range. It is very important to make sure you don’t get two characters with the exact same name this way as Diablo/Hellfire does not manage to handle such a situation well.